[ Music & Noise ]
>> For those of you who are
seeking a deeper understanding
of the fabric of reality,
including their own lives,
Ayahuasca has been
a facilitator.
As with a number
of my interviewees,
Author Graham Hancock has
placed his Ayahuasca journeys
as among the most sacred
events of his life.
He believes that with the
help of mind expanding agents,
we will better be able to
piece together the deep history
of the human experience,
where archeological
evidence leaves off,
our collective memory
can fill in the gaps.
I met with Graham in Scottsdale,
Arizona at the Earth-Keeper's
Conference to speak
about Ayahuasca and the right to
sovereignty over our own minds.
It's good to see you again.
It's been a couple of years.
Last time we sat together,
you had just finished--
I think you only had advance
copies of Entangled,--
>> Yes.
>> -- which was very interesting
'cause it was your first work
of fiction, and you didn't
know how it was going to fly.
How did it fly?
>> Well, it's been rather
difficult to reinvent myself
as a novelist in my 60's.
The publishing industry
likes to keep me in a box
of writing non-fiction.
But I feel as a creative
artist that it's my right
to explore other
areas of my craft.
>> Right.
>> And I felt very strongly
called for some time to do some
of my work in the
realm of fiction.
But it's very difficult.
I've had many big
bestsellers in non-fiction.
>> Yes. You're cash
cow in that genre.
>> Yes. And now starting
out writing fiction,
it's like starting again
from the beginning.
It's like being 25
again, you know.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'm completely
unknown as a novelist
and the publishing industry
reluctantly publishes my novels
but doesn't particularly want
to push them or promote them.
So, it's very-- so Entangled,
those who've read it,
seem to have visceral
reactions to it.
People either love it or
hate it, which is fine.
I'm very happy with either.
But not a vast majority.
>> It means they're not
sleeping through it.
>> Yeah, not a vast number
of people have read it.
>> So the interesting thing
we talked about last time was
that when you are
going non-fiction,
which you're well-known,
very, very well-known for.
I mean I started a lot of my
journey based on your work
about 20 years ago too.
>> Yeah.
>> The problem is you keep
bumping up against science
and peer review and
all this sort of thing
and you are pushing
the envelope.
That's the nature of what
you're-- to do your work.
>> Yeah.
>> So by going into fiction,
aren't you able to kind of jump
that [inaudible] a bit and
put forth theories that--
>> Well that's the delight
for me with fiction.
>> Yeah.
>> Because I don't have
to bulletproof my arguments
with 2,000 footnotes.
Because to the critics, I can
say, "Relax, it's just fantasy."
But it becomes possible to
explore extraordinary ideas.
So in Entangled, I was looking
at demonic influence
in human affairs.
I was looking at time travel.
I was looking at the
role of super na--
of beneficent supernatural
beings such as the Blue Angel
who features an Entangled
that people have been reporting
encounters with entities
of this type down the ages.
And science of course
completely dismisses them.
But I think they've had a huge
role to play in the human story.
>> And a confluence of
history in a new way
where you were putting various
considered primitive original
peoples together in
the same time frame--
>> Well, yes.
>> -- interacting
with certain traits.
>> I mean Entangled involve
one young woman, Leoni,
in 21st century Los Angeles
and another young woman, Ria,
24,000 years ago
in the Stone Age.
And it involved altered
states of consciousness,
the use of visionary
plants in the case of Ria
in the Stone Age, psychedelic
mushrooms in the case of Leoni
in the modern age,
dimethyltryptamine
and then Ayahuasca in
which the active ingredient
is dimethyltryptamine.
And I think perhaps these
are also reasons why the mass
mainstream audience
didn't go for the book
because the book is dealing with
very challenging and edgy ideas.
>> Yes.
>> And it's suggesting that
in these altered states
of consciousness brought
on by visionary plants,
we may have incredibly
important experiences
which might even
make it possible
to transcend the
barrier of time.
Once we step out of the body,
once we're no longer confined
to the material plane, then the
time space continuum no longer
applies upon us.
And it might be possible
to visit different epochs,
perhaps not in physical form,
but in an out of body form.
And that's what I considered
and explored in Entangled
because the basic theme
is that with the--
my two heroines are dealing
with a time traveling demon.
And that's why the benevolent
force behind the story,--
>> Very exciting.
>> -- the Blue Angel needs to
have one person in the timeframe
of 24,000 years ago and
another one today both working
to fight this battle
of good against evil.
>> It was interesting
you chose heroines.
>> Yes.
>> And then, again, when you
speak about your journeys
of Ayahuasca, which we'll go
into a minute because I want
to talk about the
TED Talks controversy
that is still roaring.
>> Yeah.
>> Again, it's Mother
Ayahuasca that you connected
as a feminine essence.
>> Yes, it's a curios
thing I find as a writer.
I'm not massively attracted
to writing male characters.
I'm more interested in female
characters and I feel--
>> Why is that?
>> I don't know.
I feel that that much that
is noble and nurturing,
and courageous, and powerful
about the human race is
in the feminine side.
I think we live in a
testosterone-driven epoch today
and have done for quite a while
and men have been calling the
shots but with horrific results,
you know, where there's--
with the--
the balance of the feminine
i's not been allowed in.
And we see this culture of
aggression, and competition,
and warfare, and conspicuous
consumption, and everything
that goes with that, and I feel
that that comes from a society
that is overbalanced
in the direction
of a particularly
narrow interpretation
of the male energy.
So I find myself wanting to
honor the feminine in my stories
and wanting to look at the
massive role, hidden, often,
but massive in human
affairs that women have had--
>> Well, and--
>> -- and the [inaudible]
that they have played.
>> And for whoever doesn't know,
you chose a very powerful wife,
a beautiful, powerful
being as your wife,
so you have this
influence in your life
with Santha all the time--
[Inaudible Remark] --
who is your partner.
And for whoever has read
your book, of course she's
in beautiful photography
as well.
>> That's right.
She's my partner--
>> So you're steeped
in this energy and--
>> -- and my fellow adventurer.
>> Yes.
>> And I think I would be lost
without Santha somewhere
in my life.
>> Yes. So--
>> She's been huge
balancing influence for me.
>> Absolutely.
Okay, now let's talk about
the journeys, the Ayahuasca--
Mother Ayahuasca and so forth.
>> Yes.
>> And before we go
into the details of more
or less your visions
and discoveries,
let's talk about the fact--
you talked about it publicly
at the TED Talks event.
>> Yes, I did.
>> And you talked
about your background,
where you had been doing a
lot of cannabis in the past
and your journey through that
and out the other side of that,
what had happened with you.
It was a very personal
and powerful talk.
>> Yeah, I told the personal
story and I felt naively
that TED was the right
place to tell that story.
>> You were invited, right?
>> I was invited and I was
invited to a conference
of which the theme
was, you know,
"Challenging Existing
Paradigms",
so I felt write at home--
>> Right.
>> -- in that theme.
And I was also aware that people
in previous TED Talks had talked
about psychedelics,
so I didn't see why
that should be a problem either.
And the personal element
of my story which I relayed
in that talk is very-- is really
very straightforward which is
that Ayahuasca is known
as a healing agency
amongst other things,
this entity that people all
around the world encounter
in the Ayahuasca
experience and tend
to construe as Mother Ayahuasca.
And I was very careful to say
in the TED Talk, I make no claim
to the reality status
of this entity.
I'm simply reporting the
phenomenology that people all
over the world are encountering
in intelligence what they
interpret as in intelligence
when they drink Ayahuasca.
And most often, she
appears in female form.
Although she's a shapeshifter,
she may sometimes come
as a jaguar, sometimes
as a serpent,
sometimes as a human woman.
And she has powerful lessons
to teach us about ourselves.
So, although you sense a power
of love in this intelligence
that you encounter, it's
a kind of tough love.
You know, she--
>> Do you have reality reflected
back at you at something?
>> Yeah. She will not let
you off the hook lightly.
You are confronted with the
truth about your own behavior.
And something that was bending
my behavior out of shape
for many, many years was my
own personal abuse of cannabis.
When I talk about cannabis, I
want to make it absolutely clear
that I have nothing against
cannabis, and I celebrate
and honor the right of
adults, the sovereign right
to make choices over
their own bodies
and their own consciousness
to use cannabis
if they wish to do so.
I believe our society
has no right to intervene
in adult's sovereign
decisions about his or her body
and his or her consciousness.
And furthermore, I recognize
a cannabis can be a wonderful
healing agency for
many people and--
>> You just went overboard.
>> I went overboard.
I was-- I believe that cannabis
like all the sacred plants
should be treated with respect
and should not be smoked 16
hours a day, seven days a week.
And I got a--
>> You had a vaporizer.
>> I had a vaporizer,
so I was smoking steam
and no combustion products,
much better for the lungs.
>> You were serious.
>> I was serious.
I have three vaporizers
a matter of fact.
I was very committed to
my cannabis relationship.
>> I can't imagine the
world you were living in.
I was mostly doing that in--
for a period of time
when I was skiing and--
>> Yeah.
>> -- having a lot
of fun outdoors,
and it was kind of
ragweed back then.
>> Yeah.
>> But this sounds serious.
>> That's very strong--
>> Yes.
>> -- in how we're dealing with
very strong strains of cannabis,
and may be that was
part of the problem.
Cannabis, very, very heavily
focused of the THC end
of the ingredient,
less on the CBD
because cannabis has a
range of ingredients.
>> Right.
>> And--
>> That creates paranoia.
>> Well, it's well-known.
>> And that's what I noticed.
>> And that was one
of my problems was
that I became paranoid,
suspicious, jealous.
I didn't trust anybody.
I behaved negatively
towards my wonderful wife
and partner Santha.
>> You were in the
prison of your own making.
>> There was lots of ways by
which I was refusing to admit.
And from the moment
that I started drinking,
I was which was in 2003, I
did start to get messages
that I needed to do something
about my cannabis habit
and would even feel really bad
about that during
the session itself,
but I kept going
back to the habit.
And it was only in 2011 when
I was already up to something
like 35, 40 Ayahuasca sessions
and I went down to Brazil
for five sessions that's--
and I shall continue to call her
Mother Ayahuasca whether she's
real or not.
Mother Ayahuasca focused on my
cannabis problem and showed me
that I was moving in the
wrong direction in my life
and that I was poised
on the edge of an abyss.
And that if I continue to allow
my behavior to deteriorate
in the way that it was doing
because of my abuse of cannabis,
there would be some sense
in which I might be immortally
doomed that I could not--
that I could not put right the
wrongs and the pain and the hurt
that my behavior was causing.
So, in a way Mother
Ayahuasca took me to hell.
And I'm not claiming
that hell is real either.
>> It was your experience.
>> But I was taken to a place
and shown very, very vividly,
this is what you will face
if you don't fix this
problem in your life.
>> What did that look like?
>> It looked like something out
of Hieronymus Bosch, you know.
Hieronymus Bosch was a
visionary artist of the 1400s
and he painted hell a number of
times and it looked like that.
And it looked a little bit
like the Ancient Egyptian
Judgment Hall of Osiris
where every action, every
thought, every deed,
every moment of your life is--
becomes transparent and
you must account for it.
And I found that where the
heart is wade and the scales
against the feather truth.
And I found that the bending
out of shape of my behavior,
of my attitude to the
world that was linked to,
I would not say it was caused
by cannabis, but was linked
to cannabis would put me
in a place of jeopardy
in the judgment hall and that
my heart would not weigh light
against the feather.
And this was an alarming
situation for me.
There were elements
of those experiences,
those five experiences in Brazil
which are too painful
for me to recount.
But the net result is
that when I came back
to England, I was done.
>> And that was 2011.
I was done with cannabis
and I have never
smoked it against since.
And for me, it has been
a wonderful revelation.
So--
>> What did you discover
in yourself
when that was no
longer clouding you?
>> Well, first of all,
what I discovered is
that all the pain--
'cause it was--
jealousy and suspicion were
causing me pain as well as--
>> Yes.
>> -- causing others pain.
>> Right.
>> And the first-- so that
just vanished completely.
I don't approach life.
I don't approach the world.
I don't approach my wife.
I don't approach
anybody I meet in a state
of suspicion or mistrust.
I come from a place of trust.
And I would rather
trust people now
and perhaps be proved
wrong than mistrust them.
I don't like--
>> Too painful.
>> -- being in a
place of mistrust.
It's much too painful.
All of that is gone.
I have absolutely no paranoia.
I have no suspicion.
I feel very comfortable
inside my own skin.
And I don't elaborate
fantasies to worry about.
I feel much more-- much, much
happier and much more relaxed.
And the big thing that was
worried me about cannabis
which was that if I stopped it,
I wouldn't be able
to write my books.
That turned out to
be total nonsense.
And that far from
becoming less productive
since I stopped smoking
cannabis,
I've become much
more productive--
>> Yeah, and I--
>> -- and like much
more fluently.
>> But at the same time, during
the years you were smoking,
you were cranking out books.
It's like people
listening to this would say,
"How is that possible?
Those books were brilliant
and there were lots
of it, dozen of them or so."
>> Yeah, I was cranking
up books.
And they were good books.
>> Yes, they were.
>> I would love to tell you.
I was focused with cannabis.
It would put me into dreamland.
I was able to work with it.
But I'll tell you what
sometimes would happen which is
that sometimes I would
spend an entire day puzzling
over a three-line paragraph.
Slowed me down as well.
>> I see, yes.
>> And sometimes, I think
the books got a bit overlong
because of that process
in a weird kind of way
that I would kind of keep
coming back in [inaudible].
>> Kind of felt heavy.
>> A little bit heavy.
And that's what's changed.
And also I'm just
much more productive
and I'm finding myself
exploring realms of ideas
that I actually didn't
explore before.
I feel that I've opened
up a lot since then.
So I feel that I've had a
monkey taken off my back.
And again, I want to
emphasize, because I don't want
to be misunderstood on this, I
am not putting cannabis down.
>> Right, I understand.
>> Cannabis is, for many people,
an incredibly helpful aid.
And there was a time in my life
when it was incredibly
helpful for me.
My problem was the
self-indulgent abuse--
>> Yes.
>> -- of this sacred word.
>> Yes, I understand.
What I'm wondering, though
you were talking about--
I was talking about
ragweed from, you know,
a few decades ago and
then what has become now
with this super-hybridized
and specialized product.
>> That's what I was smoking.
>> And that, you said
there is a chemical shift
from one chemical element--
>> Well there are--
>> -- to the other.
>> Yes, there are two key
ingredients in cannabis and one
of them is THC, and that
is what gets you high.
And the other is CBD, okay,
which doesn't get you high.
And at the level of the
studies that have been done,
it seems that there is some
risk of THC-inducing psychosis.
>> Yes.
>> The CBD is a powerful
antipsychotic agent.
And in the natural herb, these
two ingredients balanced.
>> Yes. So you giggle
and eat too much.
>> So it gets you high--
>> Yeah.
>> -- but it doesn't
make you paranoid.
>> Right.
>> Okay? But the very
engineered varieties
that we are now dealing with
have almost entirely got rid
of the CBD and they're
almost 100 percent THC.
>> Okay.
>> And that I think is
part of the problem.
And if we lived in a rational
society which was not governed
by the truly insane and
grotesque war on drugs,
then it would-- we
would have this problem.
The reason we have this
problem is that, you know,
growers are looking for
the maximum amount of high
that they can concentrate
into a bud.
Whereas, you know, what we
really should be looking
for is a balanced experience
which is what the
traditional herb offers.
And, you know, somebody
like me, I might be--
if I live in a society where
I could make sovereign choices
over my own consciousness and
I wanted to smoke cannabis,
I could go to a grower
and say, "Well, you know,
fix me a strain that's very high
in CBD and very low in THC."
And that might be-- you know,
I might have a complete
different experience
with that too.
Who knows?
>> Well I'm wondering, this is
where my mind is going with it
which is, okay, now
you have the THC
and you have a possible
propensity
for producing psychotic states.
When you look at psychotic
states and you look at the entry
of paranoia and influences,
is it possible
that you're then
also interfacing
with other dimensional
fields or other realities
that are also may
be boosting some
of those effects
within the psyche?
>> Well, I think that my work
over the last few years has
opened me up to this possibility
which is that the brain is not a
generator of consciousness but,
in a sense, a transceiver
of consciousness.
And if that is the case,
then when you alter the receiver
wavelength of the brain,
other realms of consciousness
that are normally closed off
to our sense may
become accessible.
And I think that is one
of the primary functions
of the powerful psychedelics.
And that, I believe, is what
is going on with Ayahuasca.
And I think this is one of the
things that really annoyed TED
about my talk in the sense
that I was suggesting
that I never claimed
that this is a fact,
I just said that it's a
possibility, that let's consider
that we are dealing
with some kind
of non-physical intelligence
or non-physical entity
which has the best interest
of the human race at heart
and which is using the Ayahuasca
state to communicate with us.
And that was perhaps
why I got my healing
because I encountered an entity
that did not have the best
interest of the human race
at heart, would not bring about
miraculous healing experiences
and I'm not the sole case.
There are pe-- people
have gotten into admission
of severe terminal cancers
following Ayahuasca experiences.
Again, I make no
claims about this.
>> Right.
>> But there are many,
many cases on the record.
>> Well, they've also
kicked other heavy drugs.
>> And huge addictions
to cocaine
and heroin have been
healed as a result
of in counsel with Ayahuasca.
So-- and there's the sense of
this loving intelligent entity
that lies beyond the veil
who in some ways using the
Ayahuasca brew to gain contact
with us at the level
of consciousness.
But, here's the thing.
It's important I
think to recognize,
and experiences I've had have
manifested this to me also,
that just as in this world,
in this physical realm,
there is good and evil.
So, also in other levels of
reality, there is good and evil.
>> There are opportunistic
beings.
Yes.
>> There are opportunistic,
parasitical, vampirish entities
out there who feed on pain
and misery and suffering.
And that's the danger when you
enter a deeply altered state
of consciousness.
And that's why the role of
the shaman is so important,
is that once you open that door
and go through into that realm,
Mother Ayahuasca is not
the only entity out there
and there are other entities
which have a propounding
negative agenda for humanity,
and which are likely influencing
humanity even when we're not
in altered states of
consciousness, perhaps entered
through dreams, perhaps
in another ways.
>> Through fatigue.
That there is this--
this is connection.
And this is why shamanism
is very interesting
because shamanism says, "Look,
whether you like it or not,
we are immersed in
unseen realms."
They're around us all the time.
>> Yes.
>> And we better be proactive
in how we deal with them.
That's what a shaman is.
A shaman is the person who has
trained and learned the system
to go over there and
master spirits and to deal
with who is not to
be their victim.
And may be-- you know,
may be that's what--
that's what the poor
suffering schizophrenic is--
>> I've often thought that, yes.
>> -- is the person who--
is the person who is
open to the other realms
but does not have the
training or the system
of control that a shaman has.
>> No filters.
>> No filters, whatsoever,
and cannot manage the
experiences that come through.
So, shamans are very
useful individuals.
They have trained
often from an early age
and they have special aptitudes
and abilities in this world not
to be dominated by spirits
but to master that realm
and to operate with
confidence and security.
And so, that when
they enter that realm,
they're not disoriented.
They're not in a state of fear.
They know what they're doing,
and they can manage it.
So, all of these
to say, and again,
I claim no factual
basis for this.
I've done no--
>> Yeah.
>> -- experiments to prove this.
I'm simply expressing
to you what I think may be the
case based on some experiences,
quite a number of
experiences that I've had
that there are dark and
negative forces out there,
as well as brilliant
forces of light and love.
And-- that in a sense,
our predicament
of human beings whether
we're dealing
in the realm beyond the veil
or whether we're dealing
in this material realm is always
the predicament to choose.
We have those choices
between good and evil,
between dark and light.
And many people have said
to me, "Oh, you know,
all is one, all is unity.
All is beautiful in the
world," this is one reason why,
by a lot of people, those
who dislike my novel
Entangled disliked it
because I showed forces of
darkness and forces of evil
at work and how they can impact
and influence human beings.
And that probably we're
not supposed to believe
in such things because if
we even for a moment suggest
that such things exist, then it
will make things worse rather
than better.
But I believe that
actually we do have
to get to grips with this.
We cannot stick our
heads in the sand--
>> Absolutely not.
>> -- and pretend that there
is no wickedness and no evil
and that all is good and
that all is rosy and perfect
in the garden, because it's not.
And in a way, the
horrible character
in Entangled who's called
Sulpa, who's a demon,
who is impacting human behavior,
he's like a sort of Hitler
of the Stone Age, you know.
And Hitler could
not have been dealt
with by everybody sticking
their heads in the sand.
At a certain point,
evil is so bad.
You have to fight it.
You have to take a stand.
You can't just ignore
it and wish it away
and cover it in rosy light.
>> Well, and even the most
respected ancient hollowed
into text all acknowledge
that you have the light
and you have the darkness.
>> Yes.
>> You have forces
on both sides.
You have opportunities for
learning between the two
and bouncing off of it.
>> And what would we have
to learn in this plane
if we were not obliged to make
choices between good and evil?
If-- what would we--
what would, in a sense,
what would be the point
of the human experience
if there was no challenge in it?
If there was-- if there was no
point at which we were tested
to make one choice or another?
If everything was just set
out and prepared for us
from the beginning by a
divine and beautiful universe
and all we had to do was
just live unexamined lives
and just get a-- I don't
see the point of that.
I think the great thing
about this incredible garden
that we call planet Earth and
the incredible opportunity
of being born in a human
body is that day by day,
minute by minute,
actually, second by second,
we are required to make choices.
>> Choices, yes.
>> And those choices define us,
and we sometimes make
the wrong choices.
And the great thing about
having a long human life is the
opportunity to realize that
you've made the wrong choices
and the opportunity to learn
from the mistakes you've made
and to correct your behavior so
that at the end, you may come
to that Judgment Hall of
Osiris or the Hall of Maat
as the ancient Egyptians called
it, and you may look back
on the course of your own life
rather as though it were a work
of sculpture that you had been
working on for many years.
And here you made a mistake
and here it was a blemish.
But as you continued,
you improved
and perfected your work.
And at the end of it,
what you should be able
to do is look back and say,
"Through it all, I did good."
>> That's a beautiful
way of putting it.
It leaves people with a very
beautiful vision of that.
>> Yeah.
>> And if you look at it, to me,
it seems that the higher
one's tolerance for pain,
the longer it takes on that
path toward making this
beautiful sculpture.
>> Yeah.
>> And everyone is on their
own path in terms of the amount
of pain you can handle
before you have
to make a course correction.
>> Yeah.
>> And that we're all doing it.
>> And we're all doing it.
>> We're all doing it at
different stages and--
>> Exactly.
>> -- different lifetimes.
>> And that's what makes
me think that we are--
that that's what
we're here to do.
We're here to learn.
There's an opportunity
here, incredible opportunity
for the gradual perfection
of the soul.
>> Yes.
>> That's where-- that's why
did many lifetimes which I also
so happen to believe in
and then can approve.
>> Well, so do I.
I agree with you.
Okay, so when we're
looking at this,
going back just a moment ago, we
were talking about the ability
of Mother Ayahuasca
to connect with people
who have addiction issues.
>> Yes.
>> Do you think that
it's-- rather than chemical,
might it be that reconciliation
that happens in the awareness
of those sessions that
actually creates the healing
that helps a person overcome?
>> Oh, there's definitely that.
>> Yes.
>> It's the realization.
Previously, you have created
all kinds of illusions
which make it feel okay to
you to have your addiction.
You might be troubled
by it a bit
but you've somehow
persuade yourself that--
>> Rationalize, sure.
>> -- that this is
right for you.
>> Right.
>> And what Ayahuasca does
is it strip away those veils
and show you that-- show you
that you're doing something
that is really harming your path
in life, the path that you need
to be on in order
to learn the lessons
that you need to be here.
But that addiction, but that
addicted behavior has swept you
aside from that and
you suddenly realize,
"My goodness, this is important.
I really have to do
something about this."
And there's an extraordinarily
healing in that.
It's realization of the
truth about yourself
which is the key gift that
Mother Ayahuasca brings
and she brings it again
and again to all sorts
of different people
and all sorts
of different walks of life.
And it doesn't have to
be to do with addiction.
It could be somebody in a
powerful management position
who was recent to that
position through bullying
and control and opportunism.
And I've known people
who've drank Ayahuasca
for the first time would
be in that situation
and I've just felt strongly
motivated to turn their lives
around and not repeat
that behavior.
Because, first of all,
they've understood the pain
that it's caused to
others and, secondly,
they've understood the damage
that it's doing to themselves.
>> Yes. And when you look at
it more as an anthropologist,
if that many people
from all corners
of the world are having the
same visions, the same images,
the same experience, then you
have to say, you call it science
or pseudoscience or not
science, it doesn't matter.
There's some reality there.
>> There's something
extraordinarily going on.
>> There's some reality there.
Yes.
>> And, you know, I wanted to
talk about this in my TED Talk
and that's why my
TED Talk got banned.
>> So let's talk about
that whole process now
because I personally have had
a little bit of a bone to pick
with TED for quite a
while now because I find
that it always stop short.
It never satisfies me because
going into the new terrain,
the new frontiers of
thinking never really happens.
You get some interesting
concepts.
I'm not saying it's not valuable
and there are some wonderful
talks there, but nothing presses
through to the next level.
>> No, this is--
>> You try to press through.
>> I tried to press
through that--
>> And Rupert Sheldrake.
>> -- asides Rupert Sheldrake,
because he and I spoke
at the same conference and both
our talks were pulled by TED
on the same day from
their YouTube channel.
>> After all of the
evidence and the work
that you've done that you're--
>> I know.
>> -- not scientific
in your research,
that Rupert who we know,
he's done incredible bodies
of work on morphogene--
>> Who is a highly [inaudible]
scientist [inaudible]--
>> -- - genetic fields.
>> -- enormous amount of--
>> Exactly.
>> -- experimental works--
>> -- fairly documenting
his results.
>> When I heard this, I
just started laughing.
I thought, "You've
got to be kidding."
So what did they say?
>> Well what is was-- I mean,
first of all, and this is all
up there on record on the web--
>> There are blogs
still debating it.
>> Still debating in it.
And first of all, what happened
when TED pulled our talks was
that they put in writing
on a particular blog page
of their website the series of
reasons why they pulled our talk
which superficially, you
know, looked persuasive
that somehow we had--
that our talks were filled
with pseudoscience,
that they were not based
on scientific facts.
And then they said, "Hancock
said this, Hancock said this,
Hancock said this," and they
said, "Sheldrake said this,
Sheld"-- but the things
they said we said,
we didn't say in our talks.
>> They were trying to
summarize what you said.
>> Well, no.
>> I guess not
>> It was as though-- it was as
though they had a preconception
about what we would
say in our talks.
>> Oh, interesting.
>> And they never bothered to
listen to the talks, actually.
What they've had some-- some
people had objected to TED
about these talks and it seems
that TED just immediate reacted
to those objections without
really studying what was said
on the talks.
So they had me-- for example,
just to give you one example,
they had-- they said that I said
that drinking Ayahuasca allows
one to make direct contact
with an ancient mother culture.
>> Okay.
>> Now, I am known
to have written books
about lost civilizations.
But nothing in my talk
considered the issue
of a lost civilization.
And nor did I talk about
an ancient mother culture.
I did talk about
Mother Ayahuasca,
but I didn't say she was
helping us to make contact
with a lost civilization
of the past.
They said I said that.
And so, I challenged them.
Where in my talk did I say this?
Please give me the exact
minute, the exact seconds
where I said this, and five
or six other statements
that they use to justify
pulling down my talk.
I called them on
each one and I said,
"Tell me where I said
what you say I said,"
and Rupert did the same.
And this is where
TED got themselves
into a really embarrassing
situation
because they couldn't
stand up their objections.
They actually could not
substantiate any single one
of the things that
they had said, we said.
They were profoundly
embarrassed by this.
They had gone off
half-cocked, as it were.
They had had some objections.
They pulled our talks.
They made up bogus reasons
for pulling the talks.
And suddenly, they were being
asked to justify those reasons.
And we felt that this was-- that
this was something that needed
to be on the record and
on the record permanently
and we have them agree
to this as a kind
of settlement between
us and them.
That their original
statements that they made
on their website would stand
and they would stand perpetuity
but they would cross
out every one of them.
And that's what they did.
So their entire original
justification
for removing my talk and the
entire original justification
for removing Rupert's talk
stand there with lines drawn
through every word
that they said.
>> How embarrassing.
>> Exactly.
Not a single word is left
without a line through it
because it was all
fantasy on their part,
not a single world
could be stood up.
Then, our videos are now there
on that particular corner
of their website which Rupert
rather amusingly calls the
"Naughty Corner".
>> I love that.
It sounds like Rupert.
[laughter]
>> And then, underneath that are
our rebuttals published in full.
>> So they really
stirred up a nest here.
They didn't need to do this.
>> But instead of--
>> The hornet's nest is-- yeah.
>> Impertinently
unnecessary hornet's nest.
And the one thing that
they haven't done, however,
and will not do, and that
they've dug their heels in over,
is to put our talks back
on their YouTube channel
where they took them off
from in the first place.
They keep them in
the Naughty Corner
and they're now surrounded
by this context.
>> How do we find them in the
Naughty Corner by the way?
>> Well, the links
are all there.
I can explain it to
you after [inaudible].
>> Okay, all right, all right.
Good.
>> They're all there,
they're all present,
and they will stay there
because that's the agreement
that TED made with us.
>> Okay.
>> That they would stay there.
And because frankly, they
were defaming us, you know.
This was--
>> See, I'm being kind
of watching everything
in the Naughty Corner.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> It would be nice to see more
things in the Naughty Corner.
>> It sure would be.
>> And some of their big heroes,
you know, like Richard Dawkins
who gives-- given TED Talks.
>> Right.
>> Well, he should be in the
Naughty Corner too, you know--
>> Yes, he should be,
very Naughty Corner.
[laughs]
>> -- because there's very
little scientific substantiation
for anything that he says.
>> Right. And yet, he so tears
down the work of everybody else.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> That's his life's work.
>> So this is a point
that we've made actually.
So it's a curious situation.
But the net effect was that
I think really what was lay
at the heart of this was that
there is a powerful lobby
within science which is involved
in materialist reductionism
that they want to reduce
everything to matter.
And this is actually not
a lobby that is based
on experimental evidence
or a scientific fact.
It's actually, if you
really examine it closely,
it's a belief system that
everything may be reduced
to matter, you know, to
physical aspect of us.
So therefore, in this
particular view of science
which is a reference frame, not
a fact, in this particular view
of science, consciousness is,
and this is how they defined it,
an epiphenomenon
of brain activity.
In other words, from the
materialist point of view,
consciousness is a kind of
accident of material processes,
that our brains have
to do certain stuff
so that we can function like
this sort of meat robots
in the physical realm.
And because some of that
stuff is complicated,
accidentally this thing called
consciousness has a reason.
It is produced.
It is generated by the brain.
And from the materialist
point of view, when we die,
the brain stops generating
consciousness
and that is the end
of our story.
And many scientific materialists
mistake their personal belief
system on this matter for a
fact, but it isn't a fact.
There is no experimental
evidence
that supports that idea at all.
And another possibility which
I feel really serious and needs
to be considered is that the
brain is more of a transceiver
of consciousness and that
the relationship is not
so much the relationship of a
generator making electricity,
but more of the relationship
of the TV signal to the TV set.
And all of the measurements and
evidence that is used to say
that consciousness is generated
by the brain can be shifted
over to the notion
that consciousness is not
generated by the brain.
>> Even Einstein himself
said, "These aren't my ideas.
I'm just--
>> Yeah.
>> -- walking or
talking, or showering,
and boom, it's all there."
>> And consider phenomena
like out of body experiences--
>> Yes.
>> -- and near death
experiences,
universally attested
for thousands of years.
>> So, old paradigm.
They're thinking
it's so old paradigm.
>> Their thinking
is very old paradigm
and it's unhelpful in a way.
And at the very least, they
should, I would have thought,
welcome since they developed
them-- their logo is, you know,
devoted to the ideas
worth sharing, you know,
that why not consider
these ideas?
Even if Professor X or Doctor
Y thinks that they're wrong,
why not consider them and let
people makeup their own minds?
Why, you know, operate in
this fashion of saying, "Well,
we don't believe that people
should be even allowed
to consider these ideas."
>> Well, it was a--
[Inaudible Remark] --
helpful idea when they first
came in but now it's part
of mainstream media as
far as I'm concerned.
>> It's very much a part of
mainstream media and I think
at the root-- so at the
heart of it is this conflict
between materialist and
non-materialist sides.
>> Yes.
>> So I was pleased
to see Deepak Chopra got
involved in this debate.
>> He wrote a lovely
letter on your behalf.
>> And he wrote a big
open letter on my behalf
and then he brought in
about 15 other major,
major scientists
including neurologists,
professors in anesthesiology,
many others who work
with consciousness on
the day-to-day basis.
And they all said that TED was
dead wrong to take these talks
down and that we do need
exploration of these areas
and that consciousness
is a mystery.
And while it remains a
mystery, we should be open
to what may be considered
by some
to be extraordinary personality.
So, in a way, this was
not so much about me
and Rupert and even the--
>> It was a larger
argument or debate.
>> It was a big argument
was involved
which is there is a schism
in science and that this--
and between materialist views of
science and much more expansive
and open non-materialist
views of science
and it focuses particularly
on the issue
and the mystery of
consciousness.
>> Yes.
>> And this in my view is the
scientific problem of our times.
This is the issue that we should
really be devoting resources
to studying the mystery
of consciousness,
far more important to
spend those resources
on exploring consciousness
than to expend them
on exploring outer space.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> Outer space can wait.
Let's figure out what this
amazing thing that we are is.
Let's figure out what we
are really doing here.
>> Yes.
>> And let's use every
technique possible to find
out what's going on here
with the mystery of science,
and actually psychedelics
are one of those techniques
because with psychedelics,
you can switch
on deeply altered states of
consciousness exactly when
and where you want to.
And then you can bring
together volunteers
and you can explore
their experiences
and you can compare notes.
You could even prepare
questions that you could ask
to the entities that
are encountered.
I can think of all kinds
of scientific procedures
that could be conducted.
You see, if somebody
just falls spontaneously
into a visionary state, you
can't control when that happens
and it's difficult
to experiment on it.
>> Right.
>> But with powerful
psychedelics,
you can actually do
that under control--
>> Almost in laboratory setting.
>> -- under-- exactly.
>> Sure.
>> Under controlled conditions.
So there's-- they're
a marvelous vehicle
for exploring the mystery of
consciousness, and a great shame
to our society is so
reluctant to do that.
We're dipping our
toes back in the water
of psychedelic research now
but it isn't about the nature
of reality or the
mystery of consciousness.
It's looking for--
unless it's fine.
It's looking for
the therapeutic,
possible therapeutic
benefits of psychedelics.
So works being done with
psilocybin, people who are
in the state of the
terminal illness,--
>> Magic mushrooms.
>> -- for example,
given psilocybin often
lose their fear of death.
Why? Because they
have experiences
of the broader nature of
the universe and they come
to understand in a deeply felt
way that death is not the end.
And therefore, it's not
something to be afraid of.
But I would like to see
the research being done,
not just looking for the
therapeutic potential
of psychedelic which I'm sure is
enormous, I'm sure it's enormous
and we definitely
should be looking
at the therapeutic
potential of psychedelics,
but also using psychedelics
for a targeted investigation
of the mystery of reality.
>> I agree.
Even as a historical pursuit.
>> Yeah.
>> Absolutely.
>> Yes.
>> I mean, really,
there are so little--
and you and Santha have
done such a beautiful job
over the years of
establishing some of the known--
some of the visible physical
evidences for incredibly--
incredible mysteries
of the ages,
and culture is a very high
civilization in technology.
>> Yeah.
>> But, beyond those
bets and may--
perhaps Atlantis rising again
is-- was said Edgar Cayce,--
>> Sure.
>> -- it seems to me that
going into this inner frontier
of memory and connectedness
is how we're going
to piece together our past--
>> Sure.
>> -- and the cosmos.
>> Well, sure.
And again, you come
to the schisms involving the
materialist reference frame.
So many archeologists
are committed
to the materialist
reference frame.
The only evidence that
they will consider
about the past is evidence
in the form of pictures
and objects dug out
of the ground.
Somebody like Edgar Cayce
who went into trans states
and experienced the past lives
going right back to Atlantis,
a materialist archeologist would
just dismiss that out of hand
as completely-- complete
nonsense and not something
to be taken seriously at all.
And what a pity, you know.
What a pity because here
is another potential way
of investigating the past.
>> Absolutely.
And the interesting
thing is nobody laughed
when he would tell a person,
"Go to your local chemist
and behind the bottle, there
will be an old dusty bottle
that says this on
it, have it find it,
it's on the right
hand side of the--
>> Exactly.
>> -- second to top shelf."
Nobody denied that he was
accurate on all of that.
>> Yeah, amazing
healing gift, yeah.
>> Exactly.
But to go any further
than our own frame
of reference was denied.
>> Yeah, yeah.
No, I think this is the
future of archeology--
>> I agree.
>> -- and actually of science.
Science needs to transcend the
materialist reference frame
because more and more
holes are appearing in it
and they're very,
very troubling.
You know, for a long time,
we had the Ptolemaic
reference frame.
In Ptolemaic astronomy,
the earth was the
center of everything.
And it was thought that the
sun revolved around the earth,
and the stars revolved
around the earth,
and the planets revolved around
the earth, everything was
in the center-- the
earth was in the center,
and the earth stayed still,
the earth did not move.
This was the Ptolemaic
reference frame.
And the Ptolemaic reference
frame dominated early science
for a very long time,
you know, from the time
of the library of-- when Ptolemy
himself worked in the Library
of Alexandria right through
until the 16th century.
And gradually, as new-- even
later than the 16th century.
Gradually as new evidence
began to come into place,
it was troubling-- the
evidence was troubling
for the earth-centered
reference frame.
And what the scientist at that
time would do was they would
invent patches and
fixes, so-called epicycles
which explained the
way the new evidence.
And in fact, if you opposed
the Ptolemaic method,
if you dare to say that actually
the sun was at the center
and the earth revolved
around the sun,
you could get burnt
at the stake.
And that's rather
like what we have now
with the materialist
reference frame in science.
Of course, people don't actually
get burnt at the stake to death.
>> And they assassinate
your character.
>> But they assassinate
your character instead
and destroy your career.
And that's why, for
example, a great scientist
like Rupert Sheldrake who
is bringing up evidence
which suggests that the
materialist reference frame may
be wrong is attacked so
viciously by his colleague.
>> But the evidence is
there, his experiment after--
>> So for example-- for example,
if you are an arch materialist
and you believe that everything
is to be reduced to matter,
you can't possibly
believe in telepathy.
>> Right.
>> You can't possibly
accept telepathy.
But Richard has--
Rupert Sheldrake has brought
forward convincing evidence
that telepathy does exist,
scientific evidence done
on the basis of controlled
experiments.
Now what I'm saying is that
as this evidence mounts,
out of body experiences and near
death experiences are another
key element of this.
Because if you are having an
experience out of your body,
then for sure your consciousness
is not generated by your brain.
It is not confined
to your brain.
It can step out of the brain.
If you can have experiences
after you are clinically dead
and you are revived
and resuscitation techniques
are getting better and better
and you can come back and
report those experiences,
then that tells you that your
consciousness does not die
when your brain dies.
>> Raymond Moody has done
decades of work in this area.
>> Vast amounts of work.
And what we see is the
materialist scientist
desperately struggling
to explain a way this
anomalous evidence
so that they can preserve
their cherished model.
But as the evidence mounts
and mounts and mounts
and as the older generation of
materialist scientists passes
on to experience
whatever they're going
to experience beyond the veil
and new generation is come in,
I believe we will make the
shift and we will set aside
that reference frame and
say it served us once
but it doesn't serve us anymore.
>> Yes.
>> And there are whole
new areas of inquiry
that we need to get into.
And that may be mechanical
advantage is not the only way
to, you know, move objects.
And may be with the powers of
the mind can begin to be tapped
into again as I believe they
once were in the distant past.
And may be consciousness free
of the body can be used
to explore the past.
>> And interestingly, I remember
reading a document recently.
It had to do-- it was
a black op source.
And they were talking about
a particular very advance
technology that's being
used behind the scenes
in deep military
types of projects,
usually for weaponization.
And they were speaking of how
they utilize various sites
and blogs to create
the disinformation
about the very thing
that they're working on.
[Inaudible Remark]
So disinformation is
really a big part of it.
So it really--
>> Well, our society is
unfortunately pumped full
of disinformation.
>> Oh my God, yes.
>> And there's enormous
exercise of mind control.
And that's why I titled my
talk "The War on Consciousness"
because I believe that there--
that the vast resources
are being spent
on limiting the range
of human consciousness
and to keep us locked in a
particular narrow framework
where we will be good
producers and consumers,
and not ask any deeper
fundamental questions
about the nature of the reality
in which we find ourselves.
>> Absolutely, and this
runs across the board.
It runs through science.
It runs through all
areas of science
and through medicine,
through education.
The disinformation to keep
people fairly much boxed
in as you say to
this very narrow view
of want their capabilities are--
>> Yes.
>> -- is the key.
>> It's they key.
>> We're not going
to look too far
if we don't think we
are much to begin with.
>> And there is a war of
consciousness in our society.
>> Yes, there is.
>> And, you know, the
sooner we wake up to that
and realize it, the better.
>> Yes.
>> This is why, a point
I've made many times and I'd
like to make again now,
which is that the issue
of adults sovereignty
over consciousness,
I regard this is a
fundamental human right
and an unrecognized one.
That if, you know, I as an adult
cannot make sovereign choices
over what I wish to
experience or not experience
with my own consciousness.
If I in fact run the risk
of being sent to prison,
for example, for exploring my
own consciousness by using DMT,
dimethyltryptamine, the active
ingredient of Ayahuasca.
If I live in a society that
does that, then I can't claim
to be free in any way whatsoever
because our consciousness is the
most intimate, the most sapient,
the most personal part of
ourselves, and I do not believe
that society can be healthy
when government claims
to hold the key to
our consciousness
and can tell us what we
may or may not experience.
So it allows us to
go off to a casino
and waste our hard-earned money
on gambling or it allows--
>> And slam back a
dozen tequila shooters.
Is it allows us to get blitzed
out of our minds on alcohol
because alcohol happens
to be a drug
that doesn't threaten
the existing order.
It allows pharmaceutical
companies to make billions
of dollars investing in
consciousness-altering drugs
like Ritalin or Seroxat
or Prozac because none
of these methods of altering
consciousness threaten the
fundamental basis of
those who run our society.
But those forms of consciousness
that do threaten it are
demonized and illegalized.
And we are told that we as
adult can not make any choices.
And sometimes they come up with
bogus reasons and they say,
"Well you-- you know,
you might harm others
in that state of consciousness."
Well I'm sorry.
We already have rules for
people who harm others
and they are very good rules
and I totally subscribe to them.
But we don't need
additional rules
that tell us what we can
experience and not experience
in the inner, private,
sacred sanctum
of our own consciousness.
>> Hear, hear, and thank
you for saying that.
And now, we have a
little bit of time left.
I just wanted-- you have two
projects that are under way.
You're booked for another--
it sounds like two years.
>> Yeah.
>> So I know I won't get to see
you again until this is done.
Now, you're revisiting
Fingerprints of the Gods
which I think was one
of my real eye-poppers--
>> Yes.
>> -- in life to-- and
it was the Piri Reis Map
that I think originally
got me thinking--
>> Yes, yes, yeah.
>> -- - about things
totally different like.
So what is the sequel to
Fingerprints of the Gods?
What are you adding
to this work?
>> I'm meaning to
publish that in 2015
which is actually 20
years after Fingerprints
of the Gods was first published.
It was first published in 1995.
But that's not why-- that's not
why that's not why I'm doing it.
Why I'm doing it is because
there's new evidence.
>> Would you share some of it?
>> And the case therefore
can be reopened.
Well, for example, an issue of
key importance in Fingerprints
of the Gods and the research
that I and others were doing
around that time was the
Great Sphinx, and the work
that John Anthony West
and Robert Schoch
brought before the public
that The Sphinx was exposed
to thousands of years
of heavy rainfall and that on
the basis of paleopathology,
the Sphinx might actually be
more than 12,000 years old.
Well that was dismissed at the
time by mainstream Egyptology
because they said,
"It can't possibly be
because there's no other
big monument in the world
which is 12,000 years old.
We wouldn't just have one.
We must have others.
And so their evidence
must be mistaken."
Well, we have a sight now
called Gobekli Tepe in Turkey
which just isn't that
far from the Sphinx
which is undoubtedly
12,000 years old
in which mainstream
archeology had
to accept it's 12,000 years old.
The reason they've had to accept
it's 12,000 years old is whoever
mysterious culture built
Gobekli Tepe 12,000 years ago
deliberately buried
it 2,000 years later.
So for 10,000 years, it's
been buried and not trampled
over by later cultures and
it's kept the record pristine
and clear and that idea
is 12,000 years old.
>> Amazing artifacts.
>> And amazing artifacts and
an incredible achievement there
which couldn't just have
come out of nowhere.
>> Right.
>> There has to be a
background to that.
If they're making 50 ton
megaliths 12,000 years ago,
they practiced before that
probably for thousands of years.
So the heart-- suddenly
the whole idea
of a lost civilization
becomes credible again in a way
that it hasn't been
for a long time.
Secondly, I know that we're
running out of time here
but the key-- another key piece
of evidence is I was not aware
when I wrote Fingerprints
of the Gods.
I had some guess work
but I wasn't sure what
the cataclysm was.
My whole thesis was that
a great civilization
of prehistoric antiquity
had been destroyed
in a global cataclysm somewhere
between 13,000 years ago
and 12,000 years ago, and
that there had been survivors
who had sort to pass down the
wisdom of their lost culture.
And I knew that it was connected
in some way with the end
of the other last Ice Age.
But exactly what the cause
of it was wasn't clear.
And I did look at the phenomenon
called Earth Crust Displacement
that had been proposed
by Professor Charles
Hapgood some years before.
What's come out since--
long since Fingerprints of the
Gods was published in the 2000s,
in the last 10 years, is the
evidence that the earth was hit
by a gigantic fragmenting comet.
And that that comet actually
hit North America and Canada,
and the Carolina Bays are
thought to be impact craters
of the fragments of that comet,
put on huge plummet of dust
up into the atmosphere and
created a kind of global winter
which lasted for
a thousand years.
It's known as the
Younger Dryas in geology.
It's a mystery.
The earth was coming out
of the end of the Ice Age
and suddenly it went back into
a thousand year deep freeze.
All kinds of animal
species went extinct.
Our ancestors passed
through that.
And that cometry impact
which came close to
but was not quite an
extinction level event,
that cometry impact I believe
was the cataclysm that wiped
out a whole human
civilization from our memory
and made us a species
with amnesia.
And there's so much
more new evidence
which I'll be looking at.
>> So much evidence
toward that as well.
>> Evidence from the
Amazon Jungle as well.
You know, the Amazon Jungle,
one of the horrible things
that are happening in the
Amazon is the clearances
of the rain forest
that's happening now.
>> Yes.
>> But in those clearances
are being exposed the remains
of gigantic cities and huge
earthquakes and stone circles.
So, the Amazon--
>> And giants.
>> And-- well, that's
another thing.
>> And giants, where did
they came-- come from?
>> Who knows?
>> Giants and pygmies and--
>> Giants perhaps of intellect.
>> Yes, yes.
And one of the artifacts from
Gobekli Tepe that I found
so interesting, I was talking
with Linda Moulton Howe
about it a while back, was
one of the statues that looks
to be someone from a
completely different--
you could say an
off planet culture--
>> Well, yes.
>> -- with sophisticated
clothing.
I don't know what it
is but I found it--
>> [Inaudible] that,
the mystery is--
>> found it intriguing.
>> -- deep enough on that.
>> Okay, the mystery
is deep enough.
Okay, and finally, we just
have a minute or so left.
War God, now you're going
back in revisiting--
>> Yeah.
>> -- the event.
Okay.
>> The events of the
Spanish Conquest of Mexico.
>> Yes.
>> An extraordinary story
that changed human history
that created the
world we know today.
The encounter between the
Spanish and the Native America,
Meshika people who we call
the Aztecs, 490 Spaniards turn
up on the coast of Mexico
and somehow extraordinarily,
unbelievably defeat
Aztec culture,
destroy a standing
army of 200,000 men.
And when I wrote this novel,
it really is a turning point
in human history because
20, 30 years later,
the Spanish Conquest of Peru
followed exactly the same model
as the Spanish Conquest
of Mexico.
And it set the process,
the poisonous toxic process
of colonialism and slavery that
dominated the world for many,
many years after that.
So when Moctezuma confronted
the Spanish landing in Mexico,
a great burden of responsibility
lay upon his shoulders.
But unfortunately,
Moctezuma was a man
who is deeply steeped
and evil himself.
The Spanish were evil and wicked
and cruel, a viscous race,
and the-- unfortunately,
the Aztecs were drown
into human sacrifice
and they were--
when the Great Pyramid of
Tenochtitlan was inaugurated,
it's said that 80,000
people were sacrificed,
their hearts were cut
out to inaugurate that.
>> Yes.
>> And what I looked at--
>> So you have a
delusional characters
on both sides being
operated from--
>> Well, what interested me is
that Moctezuma believed himself
to be in contact with the
war god of the Aztecs,
Huitzilopochtli, and Cortes
believed himself to be
in contact with St. Peter.
And both of them were
driven by these contacts
to do demonic and
terrible things.
And so-- I mean giving
away a bit of the plot.
The fundamental pieces of
the story is that the entity,
the demonic entity that
appeared to Moctezuma
as the war god was the same
entity that appeared to Cortes
as St. Peter, and drove
both these man to madness
and to plunge the whole
region into an episode
that has shaped human history
for the worst ever since.
And I have two heroines
in the story.
>> Of course.
>> Tozi and Malinal, because the
feminine is most important issue
for me.
And we meet them in the opening
chapters in the fattening pens
in Tenochtitlan because that's
the old name of Mexico City,
that was the Aztec capital.
Because before the Aztec
sacrificed their victims,
they first fattened them so
that they would be pleasing
to the gods.
And these two young women
escaped in a dramatic episode
from the fattening pens.
And one of them, Malinal, who
is a historical character,
goes to the coast
and encounters Cortes
and becomes his interpreter,
his mistress.
And he said later, aside from
god himself, it was Malinal
who gave me this conquest of
Mexico because she was able
to tell him about the
Myth of Quetzalcoatl,
the return of the
feathered serpent.
>> And that gets into the
year you established the story
at the end.
>> And the story-- it so happens
that in the Aztec calendar,
Quetzalcoatl was expected to
return in the Year One Reed.
And 1519 was the Year One Reed,
the year that Cortes turned
up on the coast of Mexico.
And he exploited this myth
to an extraordinary degree.
He was a machiavellian player,
a machiavellian character
and he dominated Moctezuma
psychologically long before he
met him on the battle field
because he had this knowledge.
But I tried to show in my book
that in the darkest of times,
there are wonderful
qualities of the human beings.
>> On both sides.
>> On both sides that survive.
>> Yes.
>> And there are good
Spanish characters
and good Aztec characters too.
And at the heart of it,
these two courageous
young women caught
up in an extraordinary
adventure.
>> It sounds like
a riveting read.
However, American publishers
are still wanting more
of the Graham Hancock's work.
And so, if you want
to buy it right now,
we have to go to amazon.co.uk.
>> Yeah, it has to be Amazon UK.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> Or go to my website and
then there's a whole War
God section--
>> Okay.
>> -- on my website and
free chapters to read online
so people can make
up their own mind
if they're interested
in the story or not.
And then, you know, go the
extra mile and open an account
with Amazon UK and
you can get it there.
American publishers
will go for this book
if they succeed in Britain.
>> Well there are a lot of
things we can't get here.
I use amazon.co.uk all
the time especially
for a really good
esoteric works.
>> Yes.
>> I have one final question
then we are out of time.
Graham, you've experienced
so much.
You've been a journey.
What is the most
profoundly surprising thing
that you've probably stumbled
across in the last 40 years
or so of your journey?
>> Well I have to say, for
sure, it's the experience
of seamlessly convincing
parallel realms
that I have encountered
through my work with Ayahuasca,
I've now have more than
50 session with Ayahuasca
and the direct experience of
an encounter with a powerful,
loving mother goddess figure
in the form of Mother Ayahuasca
who has healed me in the
profoundness of ways,
and has opened up
creative gifts in me
that I did not even know I had.
That is the most surprising
and the most extraordinary
experience of my life.
>> On that note, thank you
so much for giving such a tad
of your time before you jet
off to the airport and back
to Europe and I hope
to see you after 2015
when these works
are done and dusted.
>> Indeed.
>> Thank you Graham.
>> Thank you, thank
you, thank you.
>> To learn more about
Graham's journey and work,
you can go to his website
at grahamhancock.com.
In addition to learning more
about his dozen or so books,
you can produce his regular
updates featuring interesting
world events involving
alternative archeology.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[ Music & Noise ]